>> My name is Maria Mangini.
I am a native of California.
I, because I was born in 1950,
was very easily influenced
and very much exposed to
all the dramatic happenings
of the middle and late
'60s and early '70s.
And I did all the
things that you
would imagine that someone
who was that age at that time
would do and could
do, including having
early experiences with
psychedelics before they became
illegal, in contexts that were
very much like what I have seen
and imagined people to be
experiencing at Burning
Man, which is an environment of
utter-radical artistic freedom
and every other kind of
freedom, sexual freedom,
general craziness, you know,
banging noise, loud lights,
every kind of anything
you could imagine.
It's all happening at once.
And there's not much
structure to it.
And I-- because, I
think, I was raised
with a very strong,
deeply religious education
by very thoughtful
Catholic religious,
who really believed in teaching
the intellect as opposed
to filling your
head with facts, I
had a very strong
idea about the Godhead
and the preternatural gifts
and the pre-identified state
and what the natural status
of humans ought to be.
And so when I experienced the
mind-opening characteristics
of some of these
medicines, I didn't
think I was losing my mind.
I thought I was seeing God.
And, in fact, I knew
I was seeing God
because I had this
whole structure that
was in place that confirmed--
that was confirmed
by what I was experiencing.
So that was more
than 50 years ago.
And because those
experiences are,
as anybody who has had
them will tell you,
so inexorably true and
so extremely persuasive,
the information that
was delivered to me
in those experiences has pretty
much formed the rest of my life
since then.
So I'm 68 now.
That happened when I was 16.
So my entire adult life
has been influenced
by the psychedelic insights that
are available to anybody who
wants to open themselves
or has the occasion
to open themselves to that.
So I have a long story.
And I could tell you for
an hour all the, you know,
cool things have lain down in
front of me like little puppies
to happen.
And sometimes when
I start talking
about my personal history,
I myself self-start
wondering how it's
being received
by the person to whom I'm
speaking because there are so
many and there is so much
extraordinary good luck
and adventure and
extremely helpful teachers
and big personalities,
that you almost
would think I was making it up.
I sometimes almost
think I'm making it up,
except I know I'm not.
So when I write a biography--
as I just did for a workshop
I'm going to be in
in a few weeks--
I usually say, I've
worked with many
of the prominent and significant
researchers in this field
at one level or another.
>> Cool.
You are a nurse.
>> I'm a nurse practitioner.
>> And you also--
you have a PhD in--
>> Well, let me go back.
>> Yes.
>> I actually started out in
health care as a nurse midwife.
And the reason
that I did that was
that, when I encountered
Stan Grof and his work,
he had just completed the first
book in which he describes
the perinatal matrices.
And he, I think, was persuaded--
and he certainly persuaded me--
that the biologic
experience of birth
has the potential to create
for both the woman giving birth
and the person being born
a kind of template, which
is a pathway for all kinds
of transformative experiences
that might then
happen in the life
of that individual
subsequent to that birth.
And I think there's some
hard evidence for that
in certain cases
that he sought out
or I've sought out, which I
won't go into at this moment.
But I-- remember I said,
I was born in 1950.
So, you know, I came of age in
an activist Catholic school,
surrounded by religious
sisters who really
believed in social justice.
And my early education, aside
from the Catholic education
that I've been talking
about, was also
about the common good,
the responsibility
that we have for the well-being
of the people around us.
In specific, it was
about the civil rights
movement at that time.
But it later happened that my
civil rights movement friends
all started going to
Black Power parties,
and I really wasn't invited.
But the idea that the
common good was my business
and that being an activist was
my identity also stuck with me
and was more deeply
implanted-- or maybe
not more deeply but
earlier implanted
in me than was the
psychedelic identity.
So when I encountered
Stan's realizations
about the environment of birth,
I really saw that as a place
where a person could put
some energy in a way that
would be really effective.
That it was like a
fulcrum kind of point,
where the investment of
energy would have resonance
in the society that would
be well beyond whatever
you could personally touch.
And because my social
circumstances at the time
were such that I was
able to go to school
and because I had a good
fundamental education
upon which to build,
I had the opportunity
to go into nursing, which is an
amazingly spacious profession,
and study to become a
licensed professional attender
of deliveries, with
carrying along with me
the ideas that I had learned
from Stan's theorizing
about what the
perinatal matrices were
and what they meant.
And so I was able to do that.
I was able to actually make a
professional life for myself,
in which I tried to help women
have the birth they wanted
as midwives do.
That's what they do.
And I was able to do that.
And as often happens
with midwives,
I kind of aged out of the
intrapartum environment
because it involves getting
up in the middle of the night
and being able to make sense.
And you kind of get
older than that.
And so I was very interested
in intrapartum obstetrics
for a long time.
But then I got interested in
problems with reproduction.
Then I got interested
in problems
with the menstrual cycle.
Then I got interested in
problems with the menopause.
And what I'm discovering now as
I'm approaching the age of 70
is that the next iteration
of that same set of skills
and insights is being interested
in death and dying, which
is exactly the same
constellation of skills which
is required to attend birth.
You have to have
some kind of idea
of what the map is
so that if, you know,
people are wandering
too far off the path,
you can maybe help them
to get back on the road.
But mainly you have
to be able to be with.
That's the big skill.
And the other skill is being
able to not let somebody else's
anxiety become your anxiety.
And I've practiced that a lot.
And it also kind
of came in handy
in and around different
kinds of psychedelic sessions
I've been around
because it seems
like that's also a fairly useful
set of skills for that as well.
But my professional
identity has evolved
in that same kind of like
seamless, no problem, one thing
after another.
If you proceed confidently in
the direction of your dreams,
the path just opens
up in front of you.
But a lot of other things
that are very much of interest
to me, I think and
to you, have to do
with Native Americans
and other Native people
and other continuously
present cultures that
have been using different kinds
of psychoactive substances
to their benefit for
a very long time.
Some of those things
are historically
recorded and remembered.
Some of them are dimly
understood to have happened,
like the Eleusinian mysteries,
for example, about which we
think we might know something.
But we don't actually
know anything
because it was so, so sacred
that people were absolutely
forbidden to talk about
what exactly happened there.
But when you know the kind
and character of experiences
of certain kinds
of altered states,
you kind of have to think that
just the way people came out
of that experience,
something like that
must have been going on there.
And in order for it
to occur reliably,
it's very likely that there
was some substance that
was employed to make
sure that people really
got a shot at having
the experience
that they went there for.
>> Can you describe
the Eleusinian?
Is that--
>> Eleusinian, this is--
Eleusis was a temple in ancient
Greece, to which everyone,
free or slave--
I believe only
people who had killed
another person were excluded--
but everyone was expected to go
and go through this experience
once in their lifetime.
And it was an experience
which took place at night.
It was under the influence
of some guides, who
had the custody of the
temple and the mystery
that was inherent
in that temple.
When you see a Greek frieze
and it has that interlocking
pattern that looks like this
along the top and the bottom,
that's the hand of the
psychopump, the leader,
leading the initiant through
the maze of the mystery.
And people commonly had that
experience in that culture.
And, you know, I think
there are probably
lots of other ancient world
uses for psychoactive plants,
about which we just
don't have a clue or even
the beginning of a clue.
You know, there have been
various mummified remains
that have been found
with cannabis plants
and stuff like that.
I don't actually know
that detail in that way.
But I do know these things.
I know a few things.
I know that here
in North America,
there are only a
few places where
no reliable supply of
psychoactive vegetation
is available.
And in those areas, some
very different kinds
of ways of changing
consciousness have emerged.
Like in the Northern
Plains, for example,
there are very many
extreme ceremonies
in which thirsting, fasting,
phonic driving with drums,
photic driving with the
influence of the sun,
dancing until you're exhausted
are used to bring people
to a different state
of consciousness
in a place where there are
hardly any psychoactive plants.
And this is not science.
This is my observation.
I think that people figure out
a way to get into those states
regardless.
But there certainly is
still a living culture
of use of the peyote cactus.
There still is a living culture
of the use of sacred mushrooms,
even in the area
around the Great Lakes.
At one time, Gordon
Wasson made contact
with an Indigenous
woman who presented
a kind of mushroom
ceremonial experience that
had its place in that
part of the world.
And I think many other things
that we just don't know about.
Ibogaine, for example,
which is tabernanthe iboga,
is the bark of a root which is
used as an initiatory process
in Africa.
It's also used as an adjunct
to hunting because it
kind of immobilizes you.
And you can sit motionless
by the waterfall for 24 hours
or so until the game comes.
So it's got more than one use.
And then, of course,
there's the whole world
of ayahuasca, which people--
many more people know a
lot more about than I do.
There's a plant,
salvia divinorum,
which is used in
Mexico, which I think
is one of the lesser-known
plants, psychoactive plants.
There are lots of these plants.
Plus, we're just sort of
beginning to figure out
DMT on its own now.
And pretty much
you could-- like,
if you're looking
for DMT, pretend
you're a hummingbird
because pretty much
anything a hummingbird will
be attracted to has DMT in it.
Any kind of things that
have that red coloration
pretty much have DMT and
lots of other things.
And so these things
are everywhere.
And I have had
the good fortune--
I was married to
a man who was very
active in a lot of
Native American politics
and other activities.
And so I've had of-- and
I also was the funding--
I was the philanthropic chair
of Native American Projects
for the Seva Foundation
for well over a decade.
So I've had a lot of
opportunity to interact
with Indian communities in ways
that were extremely welcoming.
In that tradition, one of the
kind of facetious things that
people say when they're
trying to introduce you
to their ceremonies
and have you not, like,
make too many faux pas, one
of the things that people will
often say-- and it kind of
sounds like a joke but a lot
of Indian humor has teaching
that's packaged in humor--
they'll say, take off your shoes
and get to know your Mother.
And that, to me, is a suggestion
that the planetary wisdom
and the biologic wisdom and
the botanical wisdom that
brought our ancestors
to have a high regard
for these substances
is here for us.
You don't need a
shaman to tell you
how many bat wings
to put in the brew.
You just have to be able
to listen in a certain way.
And that which knows
in the universe what
is useful for those purposes
will reveal itself to you.
And I think that's--
I'm a little at odds with
some of the sort of well-known
lights of psychedelic life,
who, you know, believed in--
I don't know-- people who
came from other planets
or ascended monkeys or I don't
know any of that kind of stuff.
But I think the
plants know a lot.
And if you're listening,
they'll tell you what they know.
It's clear that it's safe
to do this because people
have been doing it for ages.
And a lot of things
that are actually
missing or I feel are missing--
and I think I'm not alone
in feeling that they're
missing from the culture
that we're living in-- are
associated with experiences
to do with these plants,
things like rites of passage
in which people get identified
as moving from childhood
to adulthood,
under the influence
of a psychoactive substance,
which then is used to open them
to the teaching of
what it means to be
an adult member of the society
into which they are entering.
And so I think there are some
people who have figured out
that some of the substances
that are available to us here
now can be used in that way.
There certainly is--
you know, hippies--
once again, I said
I was born in 1950.
I was raised in the
San Francisco Bay Area.
What do you think?
Hippies knew a lot
of important things.
And one of the
reasons that they did
was that they were
open to the things that
could be learned from
these kinds of experiences.
And I think there are a lot
of intentional communities,
particularly here in the
Bay Area, where that need
that young people sometimes
feel for that kind of validation
of their young adulthood
has been produced
with the psychedelic
plants for them
by their elders in little ways
and little communities that
got it, that that was
something important.
So there's that.
But what mostly happened
was molecular chemistry
revealed itself to
us in the first case
through the experimentation
of Dr. Hoffman.
And I really strongly
want to say this.
And, Stan, if you're listening
and I'm wrong, I'm sorry.
But I would be willing to
give up my next week's pay
to say I think I'm
right about this.
At the Kabuki Hotel
long years ago,
there was a conference that
many psychedelic lights
participated in.
Gordon Wasson was there.
Peter Furst was there,
and Dr. Hoffman was there.
And this was before his book,
"LSD: My Problem Child,"
had come out.
And I had at one time a
cassette tape of this,
and I loaned it to someone
who never gave it back to me.
So I cannot prove that
I actually heard this.
Maybe I imagined it.
But I believe Dr. Hoffman said
that a bench scientist, once he
or she has formed his or
her laboratory habits,
is not appreciably likely
to change those habits
at any future time.
So the likelihood
that he accidentally
ingested LSD for
the first time when
he had the first experience
that altered his consciousness
is possibly not the explanation.
And that, in fact--
now, remember,
I'm the Catholic girl here
talking so transubstantiation
is something that's
in my vocabulary--
it's possible that the
substance was actually
transmuted in some
kind of cosmic way
into something that
was psychoactive
because we needed it then.
It was right when people were
starting to get atomic fission
and figured out we
needed something
that would counteract that.
And maybe that's how we got it.
I don't know.
And maybe he never
even said that.
But I think I heard that.
And-- and then from that,
the people who-- then there
was the whole Gordon
and Valentina Wasson.
And Valentina was from
a microfluidic culture,
and Gordon was from a
microphobic culture.
And there was a
tension between them.
And as Gordon started
to get interested in who
was on which side of
that fence, people
who knew about mushroom things
started to make him aware.
And he ended up going
to Huautla de Jimenez
and encountering Maria Sabina.
And then it was on the
cover of "Life" magazine.
And pretty soon, everybody
was looking at the psilocybin.
And somebody sent the
mushrooms to Dr. Hoffman,
and he extracted or--
I don't know-- perhaps even
synthesized the psilocybin.
And they brought
it to Maria Sabina.
And she said, yeah, that's
the mushrooms, you know.
So there's been a lot
of that kind of stuff,
the details of which
I don't actually
feel that I'm
enough of an expert
to really be more than
a yarn or a storyteller
about those things.
But the sacred container
and the cultural container
in which the plant
medicines had always lived
opened at the point at which
these things started to come
out of chemistry laboratories.
And they became accessible
outside the context
of ceremonial life.
And people started to
use them, sometimes
for self-exploration
in a very measured way,
in a very fruitful way,
and sometimes for kicks,
which I haven't got
anything against kicks.
But that kind of unsupervised
self-experimentation,
I have learned from
experience, you
have to have extreme
good luck to get
the significant and
profound benefits that
can be obtained
from psychedelics
in that kind of a setting.
Well, my research,
let's see, remember
what I said about the
matrix, the social matrix?
First of all, I have to go back
and say what I mean by matrix.
Betty Eisner, who is one of the
early psychedelic researchers,
she was an associate of
Oscar Janiger, in her--
did a lot of the
early experiments
with some of the-- when
psychedelics were really
an esoteric practice
that was known only
to a very small group of
pretty much intellectuals,
she was one of the people
who was part of that circle.
But in later life, she also
wrote some very interesting
stuff, one of which
almost anybody who's
interested in this topic knows
the familiar formulation.
That's drug, set, and
setting are the three factors
that are likely to determine
the kind of experience
that a person will have.
But what Betty
Eisner suggested was
that there was a fourth element
and that that was matrix.
And matrix, I think,
is extremely important
because matrix is the
social environment in which
the experience takes place.
And just look at the
difference in the matrix
between now and 10 years ago.
I mean, it's an incredibly
different environment
to approach the psychedelics now
than it was even a decade ago.
And a decade before that, it
was significantly different
even from then.
This last 10 years has
been pretty rapid change.
But the matrix around which
this kind of stuff happened
changed drastically for me after
I reached my mid 20s or so.
And also I was really
starting to pursue
a professional education.
And I moved from having
a work environment where
I could smoke pot and
stay stoned and still get
the work that I
needed to do done
in a satisfactory way
to having to learn
all the muscles
in the human body
and the origin, insertion,
and action of each one of them
by heart in Latin.
And I couldn't do that and
smoke pot all day long.
So I went through
a period where I
didn't use very many
psychoactive substances
because it was inconsistent
with what I was doing otherwise.
But this is when I
was also starting
to learn to be a midwife.
So I was involved in unusual
states of consciousness
but just not ones that
were brought about
by psychoactive
drugs specifically.
But the-- so these substances
have kind of always
been there for me
for the reasons
that I told you because they
had a profound influence on me
in early adulthood.
And I always have understood
them to be perfectly safe.
The difficulty-- the primary
difficulty around their use
is that they're so
reprehended by the government
that we're in, and that's
a part of the matrix we
could do better at.
What I am as a scholar,
as a researcher,
is an historiographer,
which means
my interest is in
the stories that
are told about these
drugs and these substances
and these plants and
who gets to tell them
and how those narratives
are constructed,
with what kinds of
influences and biases
that might be
introduced into the way
that the stories are told.
So my research has
been to look at,
for example, the way
that different kinds
of seminal events
around psychedelics
were reported in
the popular press,
or the way that claims that
were made about the psychedelics
were either proved or
disproved as life went on.
And my specific topic for which
I did my doctoral dissertation
was to ask people who are
contemporaries of mine, which
meant that at the
time I was writing it,
they were 40 years
old or older, to talk
about what the impact
of psychedelics
had been on their lives as
they looked back, as people who
had used psychedelics before.
And it was quite a
broad sample in that
there were people
in my sample-- it
was a pretty multicultural
sample, which
I was very pleased about.
And there were
people in my sample
who hadn't taken
any psychedelics
for more than 20 years.
And there were
people in my sample
who hadn't taken
any psychedelics
for less than 20 hours.
So it was a pretty broad group.
And I heard from
them what the impact
had been of the things
that had happened to them
under the influences
of these substances.
And people told me
heartstoppingly intimate stuff.
And, remember, this
is in the 1990s.
Nobody was really
very interested in any
of this stuff, and it
was like asking somebody
to show you the slides
of their vacation.
You know, they just loved it
that you're interested in that.
And I am really
interested in it,
and people told me some very,
very wonderful things about
the ways-- and also some scary
things about people who had
crashed and burned and some
people who had been harmed
by things that happened, largely
in conditions of unsupervised
self-experimentation, where
there was no one to reassure
them that they--
what they were seeing
and experiencing
was on a channel that
was not the same one
that their body was receiving.
Almost everyone to whom I
spoke talked spontaneously
without any suggestion,
inquiry, or prompting from me
about how much they
had experienced
their interconnectedness
with everything around them
and the interconnectedness
of everything generally.
And in some cases--
in many cases,
people talked about how that
had changed their perspective
about what was ethical and
acceptable for them to do
with the rest of their lives
because they saw that they were
connected in a way that they
had never really experienced
before.
You can't just
talk about opioids
without looking at the matrix.
That's one of the
reasons I wanted
to talk about the matrix.
Opioid addiction in
the United States,
at this moment, as
I started to say,
this statistic, which I think
is about three months old,
is probably out of date,
but when I got it--
I got it from
someone at the CDC--
91 people a day in
the United States
were dying of opioid addiction.
Now opioid addiction is
a disease of desperation.
And I think--
I discovered this when I was
doing my doctoral research
because I--
now this is really esoteric
nursing stuff, but there was--
in nursing, there was a
very important theorist
whose name was
Martha Rogers, who
developed these very
interesting unitary theories
of human experience
and human health.
And when I started reading
this stuff, I was floored.
I was, like, this
is nursing theory?
Because she said things
like, human beings
don't have energy fields;
they are energy fields.
And the energy field that
represents any individual human
is interpenetrating with the
energy fields of everything
around.
And, I mean, this is
independently obvious to me,
so I was clear that I was going
in that direction in nursing.
But one of the other
things that people in that
sort of Rogerian model tend
to believe and talk about
is that drug use is a way of
increasing the amount of color,
texture, vitality, interest,
commitment, life in your life.
And if there's very little of
any of that, getting altered
and going somewhere else is
a reasonable alternative.
And if you don't
have anything that
makes where you are an
attractive place to be,
what in the world
would be a reason
that you wouldn't want to go
somewhere else, possibly as
fast as you can?
And the nice thing
about opioids is
that if you're swimming in
the sewer, you don't care.
So that's the problem
that we have is
that we don't have
an opioid problem.
We have a despair problem,
and we need to do something.
We need to do
something for people
who are living in despair.
>> And how is it in treating
addiction that psychedelics can
help to change that?
>> I believe that they're--
now not all
psychedelics are alike.
And there are some
psychedelics that
have been identified
as being particularly
good for this kind of thing.
But if I were to make a
general statement about that,
I would say they open--
they have the potential
to open people
to understanding what their own
motivations are for doing some
of the things that they do.
And once they
understand those things,
they may not need
to do them anymore.
And I think that's
how that works.
There's a-- I'm trying
to remember his name.
Richard?
I should know his name.
It's too bad.
He's the owner of the
Wilbur Hot Springs and--
Richard Miller-- and he
developed the Smoke Enders
program, which is a weekend--
two weekends that people
spend at the Wilbur Hot
Springs quitting cigarettes.
And it's a very
successful program.
When I met him, I really
wanted to kiss his feet
because as a clinician
who provides primary care,
I've recommended a lot of
people to go to that program,
and it has helped a lot of them.
And I know that he has
saved a lot of lives
by doing what he does.
One of the things he does
in the Smoke Enders program
is he gets people to
disrupt all the little habit
patterns that they
have around cigarettes.
So if they use-- if they
light them with a match,
he has them light
them with a lighter.
If they hold them like this, he
has them hold them like this.
If they have a little ritual
of how they unwrap the package,
he has them do
something different so
that it isn't this sort
of greased slide of habits
that once you've started,
it's just like thoughtless.
And then you end up with
a cigarette in your mouth.
Even though you
have said, I want
to extinguish this
behavior, you still
do it because you're
on a patterned roll.
I think that's probably
something like the place
where psychedelics operate
in interrupting addiction.
They get people to connect
to the unconscious things
that motivate activities,
which they know
are not good for them.
You know, I mean, I have
a potato chip problem.
I mean, I really have
I know that I cannot get in a
car with an open bag of potato
chips.
I will eat the whole thing.
It could be the
feed-your-whole-company
picnic-size bag of potato chips.
Nevertheless, I will
eat the whole thing.
Once I start putting those
potato chips in my mouth,
I can't stop.
And I can be saying, you
shouldn't really be doing this.
This is going to make
you feel terrible.
You said, you were never
going to do this again,
and I'm still putting the
potato chips in my mouth.
And it makes me understand
how people can be addicted.
I'm sorry if that's a
trivializing thing to say.
But that's how I
understand it, that
like once the behavior
begins, it's like--
I'm not a 12-step program.
But I hear from 12-step
people, people say,
"one drink, one drunk."
You know, like you
can't even do it once.
You just can't.
It's-- and-- but you've got to
understand why you can't even
do it once and what made
you want to do it once.
And I think that that insight
can really potentially change
people a lot.